Baroid Core Participant Guide 
 
FOR INTERNAL USE ONLY Page 72 of 347 © Copyright 2020, Halliburton 
             UPLOADED: 2020/Jan/13, 07:30:35 UTC 
                          Not for reproduction and resale 
Unit 8 - Introduction to Waste Management and Solids control 
 
Objectives 
 Define Waste Management 
 Define solids control and discuss operational purpose  
 Identify Solids Control operational role in the overall success of waste management 
 Recognize Historic Perspective of solids in drilling fluid 
 Identify solids control methods 
 Explain details of different methods used to remove solids from mud 
 Identify the best approach / method(s) used to efficiently remove solids 
 
Overview 
Drilling Waste Management is a strategy of minimizing 
environmental liability for the customer using the best, 
available technology in the most efficient and cost-effective 
manner.  
Although drilling Waste Management is often perceived as 
Solids Control, t here are many other technologies that 
factor into Waste Management.  
However, on each drilling site, it all starts with good solids 
control. 
  
Waste Management 
During the process of drilling a well, the drilling mud will become mixed with rock cuttings generated by the drill 
bit. These cuttings are also mixed with water, oil, gas, shale, and other elements from the formation we’re drilling 
through. 
 Before the well can be cased, all of this material must be removed from the hole. We do that by circulating the 
mud down through the drill bit. It’s first forced through the bit which is grinding the rock. It then carries the cuttings 
back to the surface in the annulus between the drill pipe and the formation. 
 Once the drilling fluid has returned to the surface equipment, our first task is to remove the solids from the fluids. 
We separate them using shale shakers, centrifuges, and sometimes, chemically enhanced separation systems 
that recover the drilling fluids for re-use.  
 In many cases, we have to treat the drill cuttings before we can discard them safely. Frequently, the cuttings 
are coated with salts, oil and other contaminants.  Local regulations dictate how much of these contaminants 
must be removed from the cuttings before the cuttings can be returned to the environment or a landfill. For 
example, in the Gulf of Mexico the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) allows drilling to discharge olefin 
based drilling fluids containing less than 6.9% (w) oil on cuttings.  
Figure 45 - Waste management hierarchy 